guidebooks/rri/chapter4/project_design/activity4-1.md, before:

# Activity 6: Privilege Walk

Individuals may be affected by technology in different ways.
This is uncontroversial.
Someone with a qualification in network engineering may benefit from the addition of a new feature to their internet service, which allows them greater customisation over their network traffic, whereas the majority of customers may never be able to make use of the feature due to a lack of required expertise.
Alternatively, many members of the public may find that the use of automated facial recognition technology for passport photo verification is helpful, whereas some individuals with darker skin may find that the system is biased and fails to work for them as expected causing discriminatory forms of harm [^bbc].

[^bbc]: This example is real, and was reported on by the [BBC](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-54349538) who carried out the research, which was supported by the Alan Turing Institute. The research found that women with darker skin were more than twice as likely to be told their photos fail UK passport rules when they submit them online than lighter-skinned men.

Whether someone benefits from research and innovation or is harmed by it, can depend on their comparative levels of social privilege.
For instance, in the case of the network engineer, their *education* confers a privilege on them that other individuals may not have.
Similarly, those with darker skin may be disadvantaged by the deployment of a technology, in ways that other more privileged groups are not.

It can be very difficult to identify all the ways in which individuals or stakeholders may be privileged, but it is important to reflect on these considerations to be sure that the benefits or harms of your research or innovation project are fairly distributed or targeted in the way you intend.

To this end, the following activity is designed to help you think about a variety of privileges using some personas and an activity known as a 'privilege walk'.
If you have ever participated in a privilege walk before, you may know that it can be a daunting experience for people who may have to share details of their personal and lived experience.
However, we will be using hypothetical personas to avoid placing anyone in such a position.
This is the first activity, therefore, where you will use one of the [case studies](../case_studies.md) designed for this chapter.

## Instructions

1. First of all, go and read over the three [case studies](../case_studies.md). Make sure to read them carefully because you will then have to decide with your group which one to select. It will then be used for all of the remaining activities in this chapter.
2. Once you have selected your case study, head on over to the corresponding page for the one you have selected. There you will see a table that represents the path that your personas will ''walk along''.
3. Like with a board game, the personas move forwards and backwards along the path, but they do so based on the answers they would be likely to give to a series of questions. You will try to step into their shows and answer these questions in your groups, and the end result should be a comparative ranking of social privilege between the personas.

Because you are working with hypothetical personas and case studies, you may find that you don't have access to all the necessary facts.
Don't worry; the results of this activity are not what matter.
Rather, it is intended as an aid for reflection.
It's fine if you need to speculate a bit to fill in the gaps.
Just make sure to discuss it with your team to ensure the details are plausible and largely agreed upon.

```{admonition} Mural
If you are doing this as part of an instructor-led version of the course, you will be given a specific link to an interactive Mural board to support this activity. Otherwise, feel free to use the following template to create your own.
```

<iframe src='https://app.mural.co/embed/b9c91961-fb0d-4950-9887-7381ba15ca30'
        width='100%'
        height='480px'
        style='min-width: 640px; min-height: 480px; background-color: #f4f4f4; border: 1px solid #efefef'
        sandbox='allow-same-origin allow-scripts allow-modals allow-popups allow-popups-to-escape-sandbox'>
</iframe>


<!-- 
### Activity 5: Privilege Walk 

This is the first activity that will involve the case studies introduced at the start of the chapter. It is a known as a "privilege walk" and is designed to help you reflect on how disparate forms of social privilege interact and how different harms or benefits associated with your research or innovation project may have disparate impacts on affected stakeholders.

Please visit https://bit.ly/3jqJjx8 to view the associated instructions.

-->

Commit message:

changed text related to mural board

guidebooks/rri/chapter4/project_design/activity4-1.md, after:

# Activity 6: Privilege Walk

Individuals may be affected by technology in different ways.
This is uncontroversial.
Someone with a qualification in network engineering may benefit from the addition of a new feature to their internet service, which allows them greater customisation over their network traffic, whereas the majority of customers may never be able to make use of the feature due to a lack of required expertise.
Alternatively, many members of the public may find that the use of automated facial recognition technology for passport photo verification is helpful, whereas some individuals with darker skin may find that the system is biased and fails to work for them as expected causing discriminatory forms of harm [^bbc].

[^bbc]: This example is real, and was reported on by the [BBC](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-54349538) who carried out the research, which was supported by the Alan Turing Institute. The research found that women with darker skin were more than twice as likely to be told their photos fail UK passport rules when they submit them online than lighter-skinned men.

Whether someone benefits from research and innovation or is harmed by it, can depend on their comparative levels of social privilege.
For instance, in the case of the network engineer, their *education* confers a privilege on them that other individuals may not have.
Similarly, those with darker skin may be disadvantaged by the deployment of a technology, in ways that other more privileged groups are not.

It can be very difficult to identify all the ways in which individuals or stakeholders may be privileged, but it is important to reflect on these considerations to be sure that the benefits or harms of your research or innovation project are fairly distributed or targeted in the way you intend.

To this end, the following activity is designed to help you think about a variety of privileges using some personas and an activity known as a 'privilege walk'.
If you have ever participated in a privilege walk before, you may know that it can be a daunting experience for people who may have to share details of their personal and lived experience.
However, we will be using hypothetical personas to avoid placing anyone in such a position.
This is the first activity, therefore, where you will use one of the [case studies](../case_studies.md) designed for this chapter.

## Instructions

1. First of all, go and read over the three [case studies](../case_studies.md). You will only be using one, but it will be used for all of the remaining activities in this chapter—so, be sure to read them carefully.
2. Once you have read the case studies, head on over to the Mural page you have been given by the course instructor (or, see template below). There you will see a table that represents the path that your personas will "walk along".
3. Like with a board game, the personas move forwards and backwards along the path, but they do so based on the answers they would be likely to give to a series of questions. You will try to step into their shows and answer these questions in your groups, and the end result should be a comparative ranking of social privilege between the personas.

Because you are working with hypothetical personas and case studies, you may find that you don't have access to all the necessary facts.
Don't worry; the results of this activity are not what matter.
Rather, it is intended as an aid for reflection.
It's fine if you need to speculate a bit to fill in the gaps.
Just make sure to discuss it with your team to ensure the details are plausible and largely agreed upon.

```{admonition} Mural
If you are doing this as part of an instructor-led version of the course, you will be given a specific link to an interactive Mural board to support this activity. Otherwise, feel free to use the following template to create your own.
```

<iframe src='https://app.mural.co/embed/b9c91961-fb0d-4950-9887-7381ba15ca30'
        width='100%'
        height='480px'
        style='min-width: 640px; min-height: 480px; background-color: #f4f4f4; border: 1px solid #efefef'
        sandbox='allow-same-origin allow-scripts allow-modals allow-popups allow-popups-to-escape-sandbox'>
</iframe>
