guidebooks/rri/chapter2/roles_responsibility.md, before:

# Roles and Responsibilities

Designing, developing, and deploying an AI system is not a one-person task. The activities and processes which comprise a typical AI project lifecycle involve a wide-ranging and far-reaching set of skills and capacities. Such skills are usually encapsulated within myriad roles and responsibilities: project commissioner, product manager, data protection officer, data scientist, system engineer, etc. However, the way such roles and responsibilities are often defined at an organisational or institutional level (e.g. in job specifications) tend to reflect the practical demands of organisational efficiency or HR management, rather than the normative demands of ethical and responsible governance.

In reality, the individual roles and responsibilities, which are implicated in the design, development, and deployment of complex AI projects, are interwoven to such an extent that they form an inextricable Gordian Knot of collective responsibility. While there will always remain a pragmatic need to have individual roles and responsibilities for complex projects, which may be undertaken by a single person or a team, due to the inescapable burden of time constraints and finite cognitive resources, such a pragmatic consideration does not provide the individual project member with a morally defensible reason for excusing themselves from the shared and collective responsibility.

What is needed, however, is a clear illustration of how this collective responsibility is instantiated throughout the lifecycle of an AI project—or a project involving the development of a data-driven technology. Figure 1 seeks to address this need, initially, at a high-level of abstraction, before being expanded upon through a more detailed discussion and exploration of the constitutive stages.[^caveat]

[^caveat]: It is important to note that this schematic simplifies many details that characterise an actual AI project lifecycle. Such an abstraction is intentional and necessary for the current purpose, which is to establish a framework for thinking about how the interacting roles and responsibilities implicated in a real-world project form an inextricable collective responsibility for reflective and responsive deliberation.

Commit message:

drafted roles and responsibilities section

guidebooks/rri/chapter2/roles_responsibility.md, after:

# Roles and Responsibilities

Designing, developing, and deploying an AI system is not a one-person task. The activities and processes which comprise a typical AI project lifecycle involve a wide-ranging and far-reaching set of skills and capacities. Such skills are usually encapsulated within myriad roles and responsibilities: project commissioner, product manager, data protection officer, data scientist, system engineer, etc. However, the way such roles and responsibilities are often defined at an organisational or institutional level (e.g. in job specifications) tend to reflect the practical demands of organisational efficiency or HR management, rather than the normative demands of ethical and responsible governance.

In reality, the individual roles and responsibilities, which are implicated in the design, development, and deployment of complex AI projects, are interwoven to such an extent that they form an inextricable Gordian Knot of collective responsibility. While there will always remain a pragmatic need to have individual roles and responsibilities for complex projects, which may be undertaken by a single person or a team, due to the inescapable burden of time constraints and finite cognitive resources, such a pragmatic consideration does not provide the individual project member with a morally defensible reason for excusing themselves from the shared and collective responsibility.

What is needed, however, is a clear illustration of how this collective responsibility is instantiated throughout the lifecycle of an AI project—or a project involving the development of a data-driven technology. {numref}`pl-scriberia` offers a stylised illustration of the project lifecycle, introduced in the [previous section](project_lifecycle.md), that we can build on.

```{figure} /images/illustrations/scriberia.jpg
---
align: center
name: pl-scriberia
alt: A stylised version of the project lifecycle
---
A stylised version of the project lifecycle, emphasising the collective responsibility for its success. Image by Scriberia [Zenodo](http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3332807)
```

A key benefit of this illustration is that is helps us reflect on the way that individual roles and responsibilities within the project team interconnect. For instance, the developers or software engineers, in virtue of their expertise in implementing models and designing software tools may have a better understanding of how UX/UI elements will affect the decision-making of the end user, perhaps in virtue of their impact on cognitive biases {cite:p}`burton2020`. As such, they may recognise the need to ensure that any output of an automated decision support system should be accompanied by a graphical representation that helps explain how an algorithm reached any particular decision.

Therefore, reducing individual project members to their *functional* role devalues their creative and reflective potential. Taking our developer as an example, again, it is worth noting that bringing them more upstream into, say, the project design discussions with a product manager and stakeholders may allow them to hear things that the product manager would not otherwise know to ask them or tell them.

{numref}`pl-scriberia`, therefore, serves as a starting point for reflecting on how a project team share a collective interest in realising a shared goal (i.e. the responsible design, development, and deployment of a data-driven technology), which requires all team members to reflect on how their own roles and responsibilities intersect or impact with the various stages of the project lifecycle beyond those that fall within their immediate remit of, say, a functional job description.

<!-- ## The Dynamics of Project Teams

Say something about power dynamics and imbalances -->
